docs/inlining.md, before:

# The case for module inlining

What is module inlining? It is the ability to place more than one module in a file, or to define a module as part of script that may not be modular. Examples:

**More than one  module in a file**

For distributing a module that was constructed from a set of small private modules.

```javascript
// Some local modules only visible to the current module.
module.define('colorize', function(module) {
  module.export = function colorize() {};
});

module.define('blur', function(module) {
  module.export = function blur() {};
});

module.define('effects', function(module) {
  module.export = {
    colorize: module('colorize'),
    blur: module('blur')
  };
});

// exportDefine means that this export will define the public
// export for this module. Needs a wrapper because it may be
// completed async. In this example, 'jquery' may be fetched
// from the network.
module.exportDefine(function(module) {
  var effects = module('effects');
  var $ = module('jquery');
  module.export = function applyEffectsToDom(selector) {
    return effects.colorize(effects.blur($(selector)[0]));
  };
});
```

This kind of inline module use is discussed more in [nested module section of the story time doc](https://github.com/jrburke/module/blob/master/docs/story-time.md#nested-modules).

**Defining a module in a non-modular script**

The usual use case for this is to set up tests or a top level module to be
used by the rest of the app, after setting up a baseline config.

```javascript
// Set up the loader config
module.top.config({ /* config goes here */ });

// Set up a module definition before starting main app
// module loading.
module.top.define('jquery', function(module) {
  // If jQuery already exists in the page, use that, otherwise
  // fall back to querySelectorAll for basic querying.
  var query = function(selector) {
    return document.querySelector(selector);
  };

  if (typeof jQuery === 'function') {
    query = jQuery;
  }

  module.export = query;
});

// Start loading main app module loading.
module.top.use('app');
```

## Arguments against it

A few arguments are given for not considering inlining in a module system. This section discusses those.

### SPDY/HTTP2

Inlining is seen as a way to get bundling for performance, to reduce the number of HTTP requests. However SPDY/HTTP2 gives the same effect as bundling by allowing the server to "push" resources to the client's local cache, and this allows individual assets to be cached separately from each other. The separate cache entries are useful when the total set of modules is not known up front, and changes as the user navigates to different pages on the site.

There are definitely types of web apps/sites that will benefit from SPDY/HTTP2, but they will need specialized server setups. Besides just baseline SPDY/HTTP2 support, the SPDY/HTTP2 pipeline will need a specialized adapter to know how to trace module dependencies so that it can push the nested dependencies to the client.

For use cases that want flexibility in deployment, and the cheapest hosting options, bundling will still give the easiest, most straightforward way to improve performance related to reduced HTTP requests. It can even be done offline, as part of initial deployment, so that the server just needs to be a simple file server.

There are deployments that do not use a server for the UI pieces, like mobile devices installing an app that works offline. Those use cases are still under local file IO speed constraints. Based on experience working on FirefoxOS, the device IO profile still benefitted from module bundling because multiple local file reads were still slower than one file read with inlined modules.

The push mechanism of SPDY/HTTP2 just seeds cache entries in the browser, it could still result in multiple file reads. For some use cases (dynamic site entry points that need different sets of overlapping module cross-sections), the SPDY/HTTP2 may still be beneficial. However, for other types, like a single page web app that wants async JS logic to complete as fast as possible to choose a UI path, bundling will still be more effective, with fewer local file IO reads.

### Packaged Format

What about a [packaged format instead](https://github.com/w3ctag/packaging-on-the-web)? A bundle format, like zip (although likely different from it), that allows grouping more than just text files into a single file. Images and other binary assets can be bundled too.

It is unclear how an app avoids needing to either rewrite or reroute URL references it might have in source form to the packaged form, so extra steps will be needed for some bundling cases.

There will be overhead in the format for things like headers and content types. For mobile device IO, where memory and processing is more at a premium, reading in a plain JS file with the module definitions will likely have lower overhead.

The same caveats about SPDY/HTTP2 just seeding a local file cache still apply here. For many offline-capable single page web apps, the goal is to quickly load the JS logic for DB/state detection up front before choosing what UI to show. This means the app will want that JS routing logic to be as fast and focused as possible.

Furthermore, the packaged format is still very speculative. It needs much more time to be specified and built. In the meantime, bundling JS based on module ID boundaries is a well known practice today. It is best to make sure a common practice that works today will work in the future instead of hanging hopes on a speculative effort.

### People inline awful things like image data

Inlining allows unsavory practices like inlining image data.

Lots of things are inlined in regular functions and variables. See the existence of data URLs. They show up in CSS too. This is not a criticism of inlined modules specifically, but what kind of optimized delivery the person prefers. As described in the section below, there is a very legitimate, useful reason for transpiling other text formats into units of JS code.

## Arguments for it

The arguments against are more around inlining used for performance bundling. This section addresses arguments not related to performance bundling.

### Nested code unit referencing

Modules are a way to reuse units of code. They can be loaded dynamically, and can be provided by others, allowing easier reuse of those code units.

Functions are also reusable units of code. Just as nested functions limit the visibility of that reuse, modules should allow a similar scoped visibility.

A great example of this is how Node installs dependencies in nested node_modules directories, and how [Browserify](http://browserify.org/) combines those modules into a package. If nested modules were available, the browserified file would match the same type of scoping reflected in the nested node_modules file layout.

As it works now, Browserify needs to keep a registry of "if this module asks for "a", give it the module in this slot". Same situation for AMD module use case (but expressed in [map config](https://github.com/amdjs/amdjs-api/blob/master/CommonConfig.md#map-).

The trouble is that these registry/config setups are hard to bundle up together, and to do multiple layers of them.

The suggestion may be "only layer at the final app layer, not at library levels in between". However, some people just like to distribute one JS file for a library, for easier consumption. The JS community is not that unified on package manager choices or project defaults, and a single file is easy to distribute and use.

### Transpiling

It is very common in AMD module projects to use a templating system for segments of HTML. The templating system normally loads a segment of HTML or HTML with a DSL, and either converts it to a JS string or into a JS function.

However, for deployment, running these transforms on the fly can be avoided, and the generated JS string or function can just be inlined in the built, optimized output as the module value for that template.

Inlining module values for these transpiled forms is a very common practice for AMD projects, and is not met by SPDY/HTTP2 or a packaged format on their own.

### Non-module script setup

As mentioned in the [story time section about inline modules](https://github.com/jrburke/module/blob/master/docs/story-time.md#inline-modules), sometimes a module may want to be inlined right after setting up the loader config, based on environment detects or a test scenario. While a `module.set('moduleId', moduleValue)` might help simple cases, by allowing an inline form of a full module body, it means those module bodies can have dependencies too.

## Summary

Inlining makes logical sense in terms of scoped code unit reuse. To help understand this point, view module IDs as addresses to code units instead of addresses to file paths.

Inlining also makes sense for performance. The suggested alternatives are just focused on local cache setup, but still suffer from local IO that can be slow for multiple file reads, requires more server and client support infrastructure, and does not fully address the benefits of transpiling.

Commit message:

mention a client pull approach for spdy

docs/inlining.md, after:

# The case for module inlining

What is module inlining? It is the ability to place more than one module in a file, or to define a module as part of script that may not be modular. Examples:

**More than one  module in a file**

For distributing a module that was constructed from a set of small private modules.

```javascript
// Some local modules only visible to the current module.
module.define('colorize', function(module) {
  module.export = function colorize() {};
});

module.define('blur', function(module) {
  module.export = function blur() {};
});

module.define('effects', function(module) {
  module.export = {
    colorize: module('colorize'),
    blur: module('blur')
  };
});

// exportDefine means that this export will define the public
// export for this module. Needs a wrapper because it may be
// completed async. In this example, 'jquery' may be fetched
// from the network.
module.exportDefine(function(module) {
  var effects = module('effects');
  var $ = module('jquery');
  module.export = function applyEffectsToDom(selector) {
    return effects.colorize(effects.blur($(selector)[0]));
  };
});
```

This kind of inline module use is discussed more in [nested module section of the story time doc](https://github.com/jrburke/module/blob/master/docs/story-time.md#nested-modules).

**Defining a module in a non-modular script**

The usual use case for this is to set up tests or a top level module to be
used by the rest of the app, after setting up a baseline config.

```javascript
// Set up the loader config
module.top.config({ /* config goes here */ });

// Set up a module definition before starting main app
// module loading.
module.top.define('jquery', function(module) {
  // If jQuery already exists in the page, use that, otherwise
  // fall back to querySelectorAll for basic querying.
  var query = function(selector) {
    return document.querySelector(selector);
  };

  if (typeof jQuery === 'function') {
    query = jQuery;
  }

  module.export = query;
});

// Start loading main app module loading.
module.top.use('app');
```

## Arguments against it

A few arguments are given for not considering inlining in a module system. This section discusses those.

### SPDY/HTTP2

Inlining is seen as a way to get bundling for performance, to reduce the number of HTTP requests. However SPDY/HTTP2 gives the same effect as bundling by allowing the server to "push" resources to the client's local cache, and this allows individual assets to be cached separately from each other. The separate cache entries are useful when the total set of modules is not known up front, and changes as the user navigates to different pages on the site.

There are definitely types of web apps/sites that will benefit from SPDY/HTTP2, but they will need specialized server setups. Besides just baseline SPDY/HTTP2 support, the SPDY/HTTP2 pipeline will need a specialized adapter to know how to trace module dependencies so that it can push the nested dependencies to the client.

A specialized server adapter could be avoided by doing a module loader modification to inform the loader running in the browser of the dependency tree. This allows the module loader to "pull" the nested dependencies in one set of requests. It requires the loader to know the dependency tree up front before fetching modules.

For use cases that want flexibility in deployment, and the cheapest hosting options, bundling will still give the easiest, most straightforward way to improve performance related to reduced HTTP requests. Inlining can be done offline, as part of initial deployment, and the server just needs to be a simple file server.

There are deployments that do not use a server for the UI pieces, like mobile devices installing an app that works offline. Those use cases are still under local file IO speed constraints. Based on experience working on FirefoxOS, the device IO profile still benefitted from module bundling because multiple local file reads were still slower than one file read with inlined modules.

The SPDY/HTTP2 approach just seeds cache entries in the browser, it could still result in multiple file reads. For some use cases (dynamic site entry points that need different sets of overlapping module cross-sections), the SPDY/HTTP2 pathway can be beneficial. However, for other cases, like a single page web app that wants async JS logic to complete as fast as possible to choose a UI path, bundling will still be more effective, with fewer local file IO reads.

### Packaged Format

What about a [packaged format instead](https://github.com/w3ctag/packaging-on-the-web)? A bundle format, like zip (although likely different from it), that allows grouping more than just text files into a single file. Images and other binary assets can be bundled too.

It is unclear how an app avoids needing to either rewrite or reroute URL references it might have in source form to the packaged form, so extra steps will be needed for some bundling cases.

There will be overhead in the format for things like headers and content types. For mobile device IO, where memory and processing is more at a premium, reading in a plain JS file with the module definitions will likely have lower overhead.

The same caveats about SPDY/HTTP2 just seeding a local file cache still apply here. For many offline-capable single page web apps, the goal is to quickly load the JS logic for DB/state detection up front before choosing what UI to show. This means the app will want that JS routing logic to be as fast and focused as possible.

Furthermore, the packaged format is still very speculative. It needs much more time to be specified and built. In the meantime, bundling JS based on module ID boundaries is a well known practice today. It is best to make sure a common practice that works today will work in the future instead of hanging hopes on a speculative effort.

### People inline awful things like image data

Inlining allows unsavory practices like inlining image data.

Lots of things are inlined in regular functions and variables. See the existence of data URLs. They show up in CSS too. This is not a criticism of inlined modules specifically, but what kind of optimized delivery the person prefers. As described in the section below, there is a very legitimate, useful reason for transpiling other text formats into units of JS code.

## Arguments for it

The arguments against are more around inlining used for performance bundling. This section addresses arguments not related to performance bundling.

### Nested code unit referencing

Modules are a way to reuse units of code. They can be loaded dynamically, and can be provided by others, allowing easier reuse of those code units.

Functions are also reusable units of code. Just as nested functions limit the visibility of that reuse, modules should allow a similar scoped visibility.

A great example of this is how Node installs dependencies in nested node_modules directories, and how [Browserify](http://browserify.org/) combines those modules into a package. If nested modules were available, the browserified file would match the same type of scoping reflected in the nested node_modules file layout.

As it works now, Browserify needs to keep a registry of "if this module asks for "a", give it the module in this slot". Same situation for AMD module use case (but expressed in [map config](https://github.com/amdjs/amdjs-api/blob/master/CommonConfig.md#map-).

The trouble is that these registry/config setups are hard to bundle up together, and to do multiple layers of them.

The suggestion may be "only layer at the final app layer, not at library levels in between". However, some people just like to distribute one JS file for a library, for easier consumption. The JS community is not that unified on package manager choices or project defaults, and a single file is easy to distribute and use.

### Transpiling

It is very common in AMD module projects to use a templating system for segments of HTML. The templating system normally loads a segment of HTML or HTML with a DSL, and either converts it to a JS string or into a JS function.

However, for deployment, running these transforms on the fly can be avoided, and the generated JS string or function can just be inlined in the built, optimized output as the module value for that template.

Inlining module values for these transpiled forms is a very common practice for AMD projects, and is not met by SPDY/HTTP2 or a packaged format on their own.

### Non-module script setup

As mentioned in the [story time section about inline modules](https://github.com/jrburke/module/blob/master/docs/story-time.md#inline-modules), sometimes a module may want to be inlined right after setting up the loader config, based on environment detects or a test scenario. While a `module.set('moduleId', moduleValue)` might help simple cases, by allowing an inline form of a full module body, it means those module bodies can have dependencies too.

## Summary

Inlining makes logical sense in terms of scoped code unit reuse. To help understand this point, view module IDs as addresses to code units instead of addresses to file paths.

Inlining also makes sense for performance. The suggested alternatives are just focused on local cache setup, but still suffer from local IO that can be slow for multiple file reads, requires more server and client support infrastructure, and does not fully address the benefits of transpiling.
